# Statin Discontinuation Prediction - Notes

## Abstract
Statins are a widespread and common treatment for cardiovascular disease; they are relatively inexpensive and thought to be well-tolerated. In clinical trials, the rate of statin discontinuation is low, however, in clinical practice, this rate is far higher. The reasons behind the lower statin adherence in these settings is not fully understood, with others previously reporting predictors such as risky-alcohol usage, obtained through models for statin discontinuation based solely on clinical features. Some suggest that poor drug-efficacy or adverse, statin-related events, for example statin-associated muscle symptoms, are possible reasons for the high rate of statin discontinuation in practice. Conversely, others have reported low proportions of individuals attributing adverse-events as the reason for their discontinuing of statin treatment in electronic health record cohorts, however, these results are limited by a high rate of missing data in the reasons for discontinuing statins. As genome-wide association studies of drug-related outcomes are sparse, incorporating genetic information in such models can prove difficult. Here, we develop machine learning models which utilise multi-trait polygenic scores (PGSs) to predict individuals that are likely to discontinue statins within their first year of statin-exposure. We compare these PGS-inclusive models to models using solely clinical predictors, so as to describe the improvement made by incorporating genetic information in the effort to provide more targeted treatments or interventions. Moreover, this study aims to develop methods which may be applied to other drug-classes in order to predict adherence within a clinical setting.

## Predictors of Statin Discontinuation